I'm smiling because I think you're an
absolute failure and I think that that's
perfectly okay I think that I was a
failure too
and failure is not the end of the road
it's the beginning right so now you can
really start to live your life because
you can you've you have you have burned
down potential you've burned down the
idea of I will always been able to do
things faster than everyone else
all of that expectation and potential
you're actually free of it it's a burden
and every every ounce of projected
failure that ounce of projected failure
comes from an ounce of expectation do
you see that like you can't fail if you
don't expect
what am i calling you friend Zack Zack
and so apologies first of all Zack for
our setback on Monday I had locate I'd
gone to a slightly different location
that had poor internet so now I've
decided to move back to my underground
bunker but yes I I I'm really I'm sorry
about that I hope that was kind of okay
for you but yeah that was fine actually
kind of worked out well I got some other
stuff that happened at that time so cool
well neat so tell me a little bit Zack
gum you know help me understand a little
bit about why you're coming on today and
how we can be helpful yeah so right now
and actually the last like three and a
half months or so I've been unemployed
and living in my parents basements and
making almost no progress in getting out
of that because I spend pretty much
every waking hour of the day playing
video games and watching anime and stuff
video games and anime yes
folksy video games okay um browsing
reddit usual the Holy Trinity yeah
reddit anime Trinity of not getting
anyway yeah yeah so like obviously I'm
in this best situation and things I I
mean not even a year ago like six months
ago was in grad school working towards
getting my PhD oh wow yeah and then I
had a whole bunch of stressful stuff
that happened over a couple months in
there that slowly leads to me dropping
out and yeah now I have no idea where to
go with my life and I'm kind of stuck
here can you tell us a little bit about
the stressful stuff it's a bit of story
because it was a series of things so for
the first year or so of my PhD I had
made very little progress in my research
oh are you getting a PhD
near the neuroscience branch of
biomedical engineering okay I was at the
University of Utah
so I was I went there and started
working for this professor he was new
and had some projects and one of them
interested me so I was working with him
and after about a year I didn't really
make any progress which was kind of to
be expected because it was chemistry
related and chemistry sometimes you just
nothing works the way you expect it to
and you don't know why because you can't
see the things that you're interacting
with but I didn't really get anywhere in
a year and so he was kind of upset I was
upset that nothing was happening we
weren't getting anywhere so I had some
stress that was building up because of
that because things weren't going along
as was expected and there's necessarily
conflicts between us but it was sort of
like passive aggressiveness um we just
didn't I was just sort of getting
overwhelmed well the stuff those happen
to do and then this was roughly like
August or September what are you having
to do just lots of work I guess was that
different from before kind of put this
having to do with classes and research
at the same time rather than just
classes was more than I was used to and
then also I would do what I thought was
an adequate amount of work for the day
like maybe six eight hours in the lab
and he was like you know so such isn't
done you need to be here more what I
didn't like the idea of spending what
would the head abs to be 10 12 plus
hours a day and weekends in order to get
all of them okay so when you say
overwhelmed
well we'll help me understand what we're
talking about a little bit more
precisely so one is that he's upset with
you one is you're not accomplishing what
his expectations are male-male p.i yes
okay he is principal investigator by the
way so you're so you were in someone's
lab and he was saying you need to be
here for like did he did he use those
numbers or no but is so the experiment I
was working on he wanted me to like each
such each of the tests I would do he
wanted me to do each test and like
roughly a day the test though takes
about 12 hours to do there's a breaking
point in the middle where I'm capable of
like pausing it okay not losing any
progress at about six to eight hours so
I was going up to that point and then
doing the other half the next day okay
he wants to do it like all at once go go
go okay one test today and so there was
a differential expectation set in terms
of what you wanted to do and what he
wanted you to do yeah okay so just about
like any other ph.d program yes you get
it like kind of to be expected
yes and so so I'm confused about so it
was overwhelming as you had classes on
top of that and you weren't doing
experiments but during the first half of
your first year or what um yeah so like
I was I mean obviously like in undergrad
it was just classes maybe I had like a
job on the side that I do a couple hours
every now and then but like I wasn't
really doing 12 hours back and I come in
and I knew like I was gonna have to put
in a lot of work but I didn't really
realize exactly what that meant
especially when I was applying to
schools and people from this school were
like yeah like all the professors here
really chill they don't make you work
weekends like other professors at other
schools it's like wow that sounds like
so fit for me because I don't really
like spending so many hours of my life
on my shirt so I went into this you know
expecting to do like some hard work but
I've through everything else I've done
and through all of undergrad and
everything I've always been able to get
things done faster than everyone else so
I was like I'll be able to do the same
thing
here and then yeah then when I sort of
sat down and realized I'm gonna have to
do all my classes I have to teach a lab
course because I have to do ta stuff and
then I have to do all this research in a
day I have to be talking to other
professors trying to get my committee
assembled and trying to communicate with
people from other areas and also have to
deal with all the stuff in my apartment
and paying for rent and everything like
that for which it was just a lot of
stuff and I'm so he's suspending more of
my time not doing this sure I want to
just highlight something that you said I
don't know exactly what the significance
of this is I've always been able to get
things done faster than everyone else
okay yeah I want to just note that and
okay so so then then what happened so it
sounds like you didn't want to spend 10
to 12 hours a day in the lab you had a
lot ya struggle in terms of life
responsibilities classes committee stuff
teaching it's a lot yeah yeah it was a
lot so I was to an extent like I mean I
would sort of did my 6-hour thing for
research and all my other stuff I was
like yeah you want me to do this stuff
but it's just not possible and so I just
read didn't do those things and I did
that and then after year we I didn't
make any progress so now there's what
does it not make any progress means um
so I guess I'll have to get a little bit
into the specifics for that I was trying
part of my research was to make these
special particles I guess you could say
and it was supposed to be just like a
replication of what someone else had
done and another paper and I actually
talked to her in person as well she
explained to me the process you were
just redoing it with a different set of
chemicals and in theory it should be
possible and pretty easy and we planned
on it only taking like a month to figure
it out it's 12 months in no matter how I
combined these things and we're buying
other stuff online and trying other
things nothing is working it so did you
duplicate exactly what she did with her
chemicals yes
okay and even tried freaking out okay
you know controlling for all of the
different variables and changing
everything which there was a bit of
conflict and he wanted things happened
fast so he was like just change these
five variables all at once if it doesn't
work then chop these other five
variables and I'm like we don't know if
these variables interact with each other
need to do them one at a time and so
there's a little bit of conflict they're
trying to get that settles and again no
matter what things I change eventually I
just have to give in and change five
variables at a time and sure enough it
doesn't work sure now we don't know why
which one was the faults of that and
yeah a year in I haven't made these
don't know why they don't work or what
variables are a factor sometimes I run
the same experiment twice and get
different results and it's just like I'm
completely in the dark no idea what's
going on yeah so yeah so that that
happens for like a year or so you know
you're not really getting anywhere and
still trying things out and then around
this time points there was someone
reminded me about I think it's an NIH
grant it's something that like all grad
students apply for and like their
freshman and sophomore year some like
big national grants or whatever okay and
I was like oh I had forgotten about that
and that's coming up soon and I need to
have part of my research done so that I
can have something to write about in
there and I also needs to go get people
from back and undergrad to write me
letters of recommendation and I don't
even know who to talk to at this point
for that I also have to figure out what
I'm gonna write about what the
recommendations are what the
requirements are and so now I have
another thing on my plate that I have to
worry about and that that built up some
stress and there is other stuff going on
part of it was you know I just ignore
that for a little while and then work on
the other things I had to do so of
course it just keeps blowing keeps
building cuz I'm procrastinating things
until sort of the first major breakpoint
was there was a meeting amongst grad
students for this great it was students
who had already gotten the grant
successfully we're teaching those who
hadn't how to write our papers so I went
to that meeting and sat down and they
started talking about how to write about
your achievements and other things that
you've done because that's one of the
important aspects of it and the
achievements that they listed out and
that everyone else in the room talked
about we're just so much greater than
anything that I had done at that point
that I immediately got impostor syndrome
what do you mean by impostor syndrome
like I felt like I had gotten there by
accident that I totally didn't belong I
had not achieved anything of great worth
compared to what these people have done
and that they were all aware of what
they were doing and knew how to do go
about their research and that I was
blowing him dark and that I hadn't been
made any progress because I didn't know
what I was doing and that I was
completely lost
okay and that it was a fluke that I had
ended up in this program because I was
big and stupid and didn't know what I
was gonna didn't know what to write
about and all that other stuff and yeah
I was I was really overwhelmed because
so many people I swear like one of them
like went to Africa and cured malaria
and a tribe or something like this is
wild stuff that they were doing mm-hmm
it was like what have I done with my
time I've gone home and spent my free
time playing video games like I've
always done I haven't achieved anything
like these people yeah see yeah that
that felt like at that moment and
just all the stress of everything
building up to that point and then this
corner core I guess you could say
moments of realization even though it's
not really reality in the sense I know
that it was a cause of syndrome but what
do you eat Irishman can you tell us
about some of those again like looking
at it from this perspective I mean now I
know that it was just my brain making
things up and saying what you know like
a moment of realizing that
I don't belong here I know now is
imposter syndrome but at the time when I
really stress out like that I'm thinking
I'm realizing that I don't belong here
I'm realizing that getting here I wasn't
this crazy smart person getting into
this program I actually don't belong
here
but you've always been able to do things
faster than everyone else yeah I know
right like it's it's this weird conflict
that goes on in my head but so yeah at
that moment I sort of I guess you could
say snaps and I packed up my stuff I
walked out of the meeting early I got on
the train I curled up in the ball on the
seat and then tried to forget everything
and pretend that it didn't happen which
didn't work but not in the slightest
and so then I kept feeling stressed out
and like at some point in there I want
to see a university therapist to try and
help me through these things good for
you and the next major breaking point
that I guess was sort of the peak and
caused the down spiral was when my pee I
said that I had to he came up to me we
had a lab meeting the next day he said
oh by the way the meeting that we had
tomorrow whoever was presenting isn't
gonna present it said you're going to
present your outline on this spring now
I had written anything this was like
four o'clock in the afternoon I had to
go to another lab across campus to do
more research that day and had a
homework assignment due that night so I
stayed up until like 3:00 a.m. working
on this presentation once I finally got
home and then I go in of course it's
crap because I'm super tired and I'd
haven't gotten any sleep and he just
beats the crap out of me in this
presentation about how bad everything is
what does he say and it was just I can't
even remember now this is like six
months ago but
it was it was like the the topics that I
was talking about weren't goods
I wasn't communicating the right points
I wasn't explaining it and I was
spinning in too much detail it wasn't
simple enough for like layman's terms
understands I was focusing on the wrong
points
I didn't again like for the achievements
that I've done that sort of a big
portion of this I didn't have anything
and I didn't know what to talk about
and also in my presentation he was even
nitpicking things like my graphs were
done in Excel and it's not Matt well
when they should be done in MATLAB
that's unacceptable and so I had sort of
in that looks to the other lab members
for like please for the love of God help
me and none of them did anything they
just agreed with him they're like yeah
you should work on those things I'm like
okay for support from someone else and
they left you out in the cold
yeah and so again like let's just had
been constantly building up for last
couple of months to this point and
there's already a breaking point
so it kept building from there and then
this happens so I went home that day and
I got off the train and I was walking
down the side what's in my house and I
know why this is so hard to say
I had looks I had stopped on the
sidewalk and turned towards the road and
considered walking into traffic
sure and yeah that was that was a moment
I didn't what
what are you feeling as you try to say
that I hit
oh no it's funny cuz like thinking about
okay how am I gonna tell the story I've
been through this exact moment several
times in my head I don't really feel
anything yep then that saying is
different
yep very very important observation so
what are you feeling as you say it are
you feeling something good are you
feeling something bad bad um are you
getting a piece of what it was like to
stand on that side walk a little bit
it's what I'm feeling is like the
reality of how severe it was good tell
us about that so
restating you know everything that I've
experienced again saying it feels like
it wasn't that big of a deal
like yes there was a lot of stress and
things but it's all like I'm listening
out like things that I guess you could
say normal grad students go through lots
of worker things had to do and I'm
thinking normal grad students this
wasn't anything extreme but then
thinking about that moment there it's
like no it was it was a lot worse is
that can you just pose us about your
reality in that moment that everything's
beautifully put
what does that mean I was in a dark
place I wasn't what made it dark join
what I was doing my outlook on life and
the world was very negative in what way
was it negative I didn't really see much
of the positives of life and I viewed
everything I guess from like very
pessimistic viewpoint so to add in a
little bit to that a lot of the reddit
discussion that I was viewing around
this time was about corruption and stuff
in the world and so I was latching on to
that things like global warming whatnot
which all helps contribute to it and
then it was like I'm a victim of this I
had lots of views that academia and I
actually still kind of agree with these
the academia is very corrupt and isn't
what it's supposed to be it's supposed
to be about doing research to learn
about things that we don't understand
and instead it's about writing papers to
get money and a lot of papers are just
made-up crap
just so that they can get funded and it
was like I am in I went into this to do
something nice and great and it said I'm
here in this corrupt situation being
manipulated by the people above me who
are just in it to get money and
everything is boxing how does it feel to
be manipulated
how does it feel terrible part of the
meat that goes into the meat grinder
grinder that is a ph.d program feels
awful like oh my god how do people do
that how do people know it's it's like
super depressing
it's what's depressing about it tell me
the thoughts Zac what were the thoughts
that were going through your head
because it's not fair there we go
right cuz in your head you don't think
this is super depressing yeah what do
you think in your head stressed out I
what you think in your head overwhelmed
it's not what you think in your head
yeah I'm thinking that I put in a lot of
effort to get here I followed all the
rules
I followed the guidelines there we go
and what you followed the rules and what
and what happened I got this point word
the higher-ups are using minions they're
taking my labor they're paying me
nothing
they're expecting needs to do things
that I can't do good what else I
followed the rules and what I got but
yeah I'd say got let down as I
understand you got fuck-buddy yeah
you're taking my time did you feel alone
mm-hmm oh yeah I can only imagine right
so sitting there is your professor tears
you a new in your lab meeting
and then all of all of the other grad
students are kind of like right no one's
yeah and then you no one's protecting
you especially when the other lab
members are like making progress on
their stuff and I'm not and now it's
very isolating to feel like you're the
only one going through it because you
are right everyone else is sitting here
what are you doing yeah absolutely
nothing you're failing it's like being
in a classroom of kids who can read and
you can't yeah yeah
when we talk about feeling overwhelmed
what were you what were the thoughts
there stuff like again this is this is
too much I can't do this too many
expectations of me how can I fake it and
make it seem like I'm doing the work but
I'm not how do other people get through
it
okay can I I I think those are the I
think those make sense I'm gonna so I
can't do this
and how can I fake it I think there's
another kind of level to that which is
that how can I push off failure you
can't do this but I don't want to fail
quite yet is there anything I can do but
you know that the failure is coming you
feel if the failure is coming and is
there anything you can scrape together
to prevent going into bankruptcy like
today yeah can I push out this failure
and push out this failure and push out
this failure and each time you push out
the failure you try to buy yourself some
time to where maybe people won't notice
maybe you can pull it together maybe you
can fix it and the more time that goes
on the failure becomes more and more and
more certain and you push it out and you
push it out and you push it out and
you're faking it and you're faking it
and everyone's making progress and it's
becoming more and more inevitable
mmm-hmm is that how you felt yeah yeah
definitely how does that feel
[Music]
again like I just belong that I should
never have gone to grad school in the
first place and that it was a huge
do you sell it was the only offer you're
a huge
I guess both like there's there's a
perspective of I'm a huge cuz I
can't do this but also it was a huge
buck up decision to put myself in a
situation when I should have known that
I could've done this I should have known
like why did I think that I was so
capable I've always been able to get
things done faster than everyone else
yeah and yeah
that's a lot Zach yeah so tell us tell
us what so you're walking home you're
considering stepping into traffic
why didn't you I thought they would hurt
what did you decide to do then so it was
fear that kept you from stepping in
traffic traffic huh was mine it's hard
to explain if it was really fear is
again it was the thought that like this
will hurt I really like that yeah I'll
figure it out later
so what did you do enzyme I walked home
and I lied down a bit I cried and then
and I think I took a nap or something I
just like fell asleep then I woke up at
like 8 o'clock or something and then
made dinner plates of videogames what
did you play
I don't remember okay what are you
playing nowadays Prince Cape lots and
lots and lots of runescape okay and what
are your parents think right now I mean
I don't know exactly what their thoughts
are but my mom has like I say I think I
feel like she chides me and like bothers
me a lot when realistically it's like
maybe once every two weeks you'll say
hey have you been looking for jobs and
that's about it but he feels annoying to
me like yes duh
why is it why is it annoying it's
because it's like I'm in this situation
and you know I've been in this situation
because I was calling you while I was
going through it all you know that I
feel terrible and then I'm trying to put
a little effort at it can't I can into
it and you're still asking me about it
especially right now during the Kovac
thing it's like what jobs you want me to
get what is there you
got some that like you've you got one
I'll go find one long like sure lunch
you once you hand out to me it's so easy
to go get one why don't you tell me
where they are
I've applied for so many and they've all
rejected me and like it's not that easy
and I don't know if it's just my head
but I feel like they're disappointed I
know my my brother he has autism and so
we as a family have to take care of him
but sometimes because of his patterns
and things he will end up staying up and
super late and waking up at like 12
o'clock in the afternoon or something
which I mean I do too because I play
video games really late at night but my
parents will yell at him and be like why
are you staying up and so late why are
you getting up so like that's not good
for you and they never say it to me but
I could feel it directed it and you as
well what's it like for them to never
say it to you
it's good question
it's like passive-aggressiveness
innocence i guess it's not the right
wording but sure that's maybe describing
what it is it's not how you feel ya know
it just school can i offer something
yeah yeah there a part of you that's
like can you just call me a up and
be done with it
yeah can you just call me out on my
instead of asking in a polite
motherly loving concern how the job
search is going can you just call me
once in your life and say why the
haven't you found a job yet what the
is wrong with you mm-hmm
how would it feel if your mom said that
jeez the yes yep it would still
feel pretty
but anything even would also be I would
know what they're thinking very really
why don't you know what they're thinking
cuz they don't talk about it a whole lot
sure it's why don't they talk about it a
whole lot if I know probably cuz
it's hard but who is it hard for ya it's
hard for them to talk about it
cuz I mean I don't talk about these
things with them because it's hard for
me to talk about it so it's gotta be
hard for them to you right sure
do you think maybe the reason they don't
talk about it is because you don't talk
about it mean yeah so I want you to put
yourself in their shoes for a moment
Zach your son has been in a competitive
ph.d program essentially washes out you
see him sleeping till noon every day you
can tell he's struggling and so you put
on your kid gloves and you handle him
like the fragile piece of porcelain he
is right
they can see you're hurting they
probably don't want to bother you they
don't want to ask you hard questions
because they're afraid of how they're
gonna make you feel cuz they they love
you yes no yeah so what do you think
they're trying to do I mean how does
someone who loves you respond to a
situation where like yours I have no
idea how are they responding I mean
again just try not to mess with it too
much they're so trying to make sure that
I'm hopefully trying but they're also
not trying to interfere too much sure
they're trying to give you your space
hmm how hard do you think they think a
conversation about this will be for you
very I mean we had a conversation once
you told me about it while back and I
remember one this was exactly a couple
months ago but we went to there's a bar
nearby and we went there and I knew
going down like they're gonna try to
talk about it that's why they're calling
yeah and yeah they I mean I remember
whole lot cuz I'm a super lightweight
and so one single beer puts me out
pretty quickly but I do remember we
talked about that and how I was applying
for things what I was applying for what
I wanted to do better at school because
I haven't technically dropped out I'm
gonna leave of absence mm-hmm so do I
want to go back and I'm like not really
and then bringing up that they
eventually want to be empty
Esther's and so they want to try and
help me through this because they can't
keep me here forever
again like no how do you
feel about yourself sack yeah I felt
like a huge like how do you feel
I head off today like I've had so much
potential and I have drops down to this
huge love that that potential yeah
potential is a bad drug hate it
what are you hearing on it it's like
it's these high expectations that as
long as you meet them everyone praises
you but if you don't meet them it's just
like faces of scorn and like everyone
nobody talks about it like I had like
all my friends were like oh yeah my tell
everyone like how dare you talk back to
this guy he's a PhD student all's crap
and I'm nobody even talks like this when
I was like oh yeah you know I think I'm
gonna drop out I was kind of it none of
my friends ever talked about it again
it's like nobody wants to touch on the
subjects that I failed now he wants it
like when you have huge potential
everyone talks about all these like
crazy things you're gonna do and then
when you fail to meet that it's just
dropped that's everything you do feels
like failure
I stopped showing my game status on
discord because I felt ashamed yeah
everything you do feels like a failure
failure how do you feel Zach what I
mean like again like like I'm a failure
like I have Arden a Hellyer yes you like
it when I'm sitting in my parents
basement
playing video games so yeah so here's
the crazy thing I agree with you I think
you are a failure here's the difference
between me and you though why am i why
are you smiling right now no idea why am
i smiling I also don't know okay so I
think why are you smiling oh I think
you're smiling out of defensive this
because sometimes when we deal with
negative negative terrible things all we
can do is smile otherwise everything
comes crashing apart falling down I'm
smiling because I think you're an
absolute failure and I think that that's
perfectly okay I think that I was a
failure too and failure is not the end
of the road it's the beginning right so
now you can really start to live your
life because you can you've you have you
have burned down potential you've burned
down the idea of I will always been able
to do things faster than everyone else
all of that expectation and potential
you're actually free of it it's a burden
and every every ounce of projected
failure that ounce of projected failure
comes from an ounce of expectation do
you see that like you can't fail if you
don't expect like you can't see that
right so like like washing out of a ph.d
program is only an issue if you were
expected to be there and be successful
if you felt like you were like everyone
else and if you felt like you could cut
it there because you're smarter than
everyone and you can't start with the
idea that you suck at life and
then like that's where like honestly
dude that's where my life began it's
like where you are now like though the
problem is that we build this house of
cards that is potential and it gets
bigger and bigger and bigger but boy is
it fragile right that's the imposter
syndrome it looks like a house you look
at it from outside it's tall has lots of
walls and lots of rooms
puff of wind and the thing comes
crumbling down and now like that's not I
wish for you I don't wish for you
bizarrely that you had succeeded because
if you had succeeded all you would have
done is add another layer to the house
of cards do you see that yeah every
success that you had has just increased
like you're just stacking the the house
of cards higher and higher and higher
and it's a foundation because
it's gonna come tumbling down
and I think you can actually begin now I
think failure is when you begin because
now you have no expectation so you sort
of expectation still but we'll try to
disabuse you of those very soon I'm
smiling because I think that this is
like good for you I think like this is
gonna change your life and ten years
from now you're gonna look back on it
and you're gonna like realize like cuz
that's I mean that's what I hope for you
maybe ten years from now you'll you'll
be no where you'll be sitting at home
playing video games and you'll have
accomplished nothing and then that's
kind of shitty that's possibility we
have to acknowledge that I don't think
that this is gonna be easy but I think
that like there's a lot of stuff here
that's so important and I think it has
to start with like you accepting that
you are a failure like you can talk
about victimization as much as you want
to and I think that that's fair because
I think there are a lot of things that
make me furious about your experience
and the experience of PhD programs in
general and at the top of the list is if
a student fails a test whose fault is it
students incorrect PII absolutely right
there's one person in that relationship
who has knowledge and one person who
doesn't it is the responsibility of the
teacher to help the student along the
responsibility of a PI's if your
experiment isn't working for a
year like how the do you expect a
first year PhD student to figure out why
their experiment isn't working
like that's the job of a PI like if your
experiments don't work for a year and
you're doing what your PI is doing why
on earth are you accepting
responsibility your
your grad student he's the guy who's
running the lab like if he's telling you
to change five variables and it doesn't
work out like whose fault is that I want
to say him Vanessa feel like it's me for
actually doing the five variable
experiment and not say no but yeah so so
I understand where you're coming from
but this is where you have to admit that
like you have to acknowledge that
there's a power dynamic right did you
tell your your PI that you think you
guys should do one variable at a time
yes and what did he say no so what are
you like what are your options then
don't have any I guess exactly so I
think you did what you were supposed to
do you raised your concerns with your PI
and your PI is young and dumb and a
product of his academic environment and
so he decided to abuse you in the same
way that he was abused the cycle of
abuse continues mm-hmm that's like PhD
programs and academia in medicine is
like that
it's like these surgeons are like all
these medical students cry when I call
them a piece of what the hell is
wrong with them like it's like yeah and
and they're like but I got called a
piece of and it's like yeah but you
don't have to call other people a piece
of you can be nicer to them just
because you're abused doesn't mean that
you need to abuse others so I mean I do
I think that you were victimized by your
circumstances absolutely but like I
don't think in a sense I don't think
that that kind of matters like it pisses
me off and you know when I work with
students I try to take the response like
I've learned that like if they don't
learn that's like my fault
right and did I really do the best job
that I can I mean they're not to say
that I'm completely responsible because
if I like try and try and try and they
like go home and don't study and don't
do anything that I told them to do like
then I put the blame on them but as a
teacher you know if you're doing what
your PI is telling you to do and the
experiments are not working out then
it's not your fault unless you're being
negligent like so if you're being
negligent in some way and like
half-assing the experiments then then it
then it is your fault but that's why I
asked you did you run it the same way as
the previous person did your results
turn out the same and the answer to that
question is yes
which means that it sounds like you did
a good job because you got the same
results a couple of other interesting
things that I'm gonna go off on a quick
tangent but you know the other thing
there is that 70% of like studies are
like not reproducible so I think that's
a big issue and the last thing that
I just want to toss your way is like do
you know how people win a Nobel Prize in
science no actually
so they actually start with a failed
experiment all Nobel praat all most
Nobel Prizes at least that I've studied
so I've studied fifteen or sixteen Nobel
prize-winning spare experiments in in
biology or medicine and all of them
start with a failed experiment what do
you think about that why does someone
get a Nobel Prize because they've made a
huge discovery how do you make a huge
discovery what luck sure but what makes
a discovery huge what does it mean to be
a huge discovery either it has a big
impact on the world or on the field okay
but what determine a huge discovery and
big impact are synonymous Yeah right so
what makes something a big impact
changes everything it changes what
something not very what does it change
what people thought
absolutely so think about this for a
second
in order to change the way that people
think you have to start with a failed
experiment and what I mean by a failed
experiment is the people who won Nobel
prizes they did an experiment and their
results were not what they expected and
this is what separates 99% of scientists
from 1% of scientists instead of looking
at it as a failure they looked at it as
an opportunity I'm expecting this result
and in the process of figuring out why I
did not get the result I expected I'm
discovering something huge that changes
the way that we
at science do you get that like the
biggest travesty here is that your pee I
lost an opportunity to win a Nobel Prize
what you don't understand is that you
don't you don't have a year of failed
experiments you have a year of data that
suggests that something about the world
is not the way that we have conceived
and if you guys spent the time and
energy to figure out what that is that's
how you win a Nobel Prize why did you
guys fail why is it that all of your
expectations think about this Nobel
Prizes come when all of our expectations
are wrong when we have a thousand
expectations for a particular result and
that result does not happen and then we
discover why then it changes our
thousand expectations before that is a
big impact so the crazy thing here is
that all you see is a failed experiment
I don't even see failed experiments I
see data I see a wonderful opportunity
to like understand something about how
the variables like result in like
compounds in a new and different way
it's exactly why you got into a ph.d
program for the first place and I think
it's a travesty that that you are in a
situation call it luck or call it idiocy
of your pie or whatever I mean I'm being
judgemental I mean maybe the guy's
brilliant and compassionate and we're
just getting a biased view it's very
possible but like I I don't I don't
conceive what you did is a failure at
all I think are you a failure sure you
can accept that but deep down I really
don't think so right I think that in a
sense you are a victim of your
circumstances I think you did the
experiments that you were supposed to do
I think the only real mistake you made
here is that you've got a big ego and
you have unrealistic expectations yeah
there are a couple of other things like
this is the other thing is when you're
smart like you're gonna rise until you
equilibria right like if I take an
object of a certain density and I put it
into a fluid of a certain density what
is the object I'm gonna do either sink
or float depending on the density of
both of them in relation to each other
exactly so if I have a gradient of
densities a gradient of liquids of
different densities they're gonna
equilibria and then if I put an object
of different of a different density
where is it going to end up
or whichever one is equal to a sense
exactly so welcome to academia my friend
so we're you rise you got accepted to
the ph.d program because you were hot
and undergrad and you're gonna
equilibria to like where you normally
belong and so the higher up you go like
the more average you become like
everyone thinks that such hot that
dr. K is from Harvard like in Harvard I
am subpar I'm really like no one even
knows who I am and like I work with
people like you guys think I'm brilliant
you guys have no idea I'm really
not that smart I think I'm really one of
y'all I don't think I'm really any
different from you guys and you guys are
so confused by that and it's like I
don't think you guys have been at
Harvard it's like you just want to see
smart people you should go there and and
I mean it really I mean I met people
that just blew my mind with just how
much knowledge they were able to absorb
and hold in their head I was like holy
and so the one thing to understand is
that the better you do the more you're
gonna feel in a sense like a failure
until you abandon this whole complex
right because you're gonna keep rising
and then you're not gonna be I've always
been able to get things faster than
everyone else that thought is the
problem like if I had to diagnose one
thing that I could surgically remove
from your brain it is a bad thought
there's comparison in there there's ego
in there there's an expectation of ease
in there right there's so many things
there that are just like so wrong their
potential like that's the other thing
good potential is such a curse such a
curse it's such a burden because you
can't win with potential either you meet
expectations in which no one is
surprised or you're below expectations
in which everyone is disappointed yeah
it's like average or failure like when
you sign up for potential you sign up to
be average at best or meet expectations
get a see a D or an F can't get an A if
your potential if you have very high
potential you just can't you know maybe
you can win a Nobel Prize that's the
only thing that would be impressive to
anyone
yeah that's a very good way of putting
it that I hadn't talked about before is
it's you're signing up for average yep
at this at best now I don't really know
I kind of got on my soapbox so I'm gonna
just pause for a by the way do you know
anything about IRB applications okay I'm
looking for someone to do IRB stuff I
heard yeah institutional review board so
we're trying to study healthy gamer so
we're doing like research and we're
looking for researchers so let's just
kind of go back to a couple things so
first of all all right so any thoughts
or questions so far Zack nothing comes
to mind no okay so we've got two options
one is you can tell us the rest of the
story because you actually haven't told
us everything yet which I would love to
hear if you're emotionally up for it and
the second question is like I think
there's a question of like what do we do
right or I guess the other question that
I would ask you is like how can I help
you or how can my self and twitch chat
how can we help you and so what do you
think should we tell the rest of the
story let's ask twitch @d can you see
chat yeah I can pull it up okay good
that's good that you're raising it but
I'm gonna tell us what is what does
twitch chat want to do do do we want to
hear the story or do we want to get you
know figuring out how to help you what
does chat say yeah yeah see this is what
I hate about like I always ask
them for things and it's like they don't
help both white people happy yeah like
like but like they just never they're
never satisfied you think having a pie
is bad
these guys they're never satisfied they
want everything all the time more more
MORE okay
so let's finish the story okay and okay
cry if you need to
are you hoping for emotional catharsis
by the way uh if that's what it comes to
I guess you know because I can ask you
couldn't you know leading probing
questions about your emotions but I I'm
not feeling that we're gonna get there
if that's okay with you yeah that's fine
so tell us the rest of the story so you
you went home you you wrapped you slept
you woke up you ate dinner and then what
happened yeah so woke up ate dinner
played video games went to beds next day
go back to doing research and stuff
obviously feeling very down not able to
get enough pretty much done getting not
getting any progress and I believe it
was either the day after or two days
after that when I was on the train home
browsing reddit again that I came across
a thread in our league of legends about
a former pro player who had attempted
suicide hmm he didn't succeed but they
had posted a link to his blog where he
left his last no and I read the whole
thing probably not a good decision if
it's a why do you say yeah I mean of
course everyone's like if you are in a
situation like this please don't read
this and after reading it I just it just
affirmed everything why does everyone
why does everyone can can you pull it up
I have to go archive that maybe I can so
tell me tell me why is it not a good
idea to read that note I'm confused
um because again it's it's a person who
was on the verge of suicide and his
thoughts that he was laying out and I
related with a lot of it and it's sort
of like it was a confirmation I guess I
look of everything that I was going
through and it was like you're justified
in thinking the way you are and other
people went through with it so it's okay
to go through with it I see okay that's
okay you don't have to find it I was
just kind of curious so so I mean it
sounds to me like
you feel like reading it would make you
more likely to try to hurt yourself yes
okay okay I mean there is data that
suggests that suicide happens in
clusters so maybe it is dangerous but
and what about what you read resonated
with you your um
loneliness the feeling that the world's
is off and it's not there to help
you lots of negative babies feeling oh
yeah feeling comfort in games and I
would say fantasies a whole games anime
movies books all that stuff other worlds
I guess feel like you belong more of
those growths than you do the real world
that's diving more into them and being
attached to them and he had said that he
preferred to be a third party observer
of things rather than be in the mix of
them and so that was like his motivation
for wanting to kill himself I didn't
fully agree with that but like I can see
where he's coming from and it's like
this work related to other aspects I
guess what I did and did not resonate
with you about that oddly specific thing
to remember yeah I I guess I can give an
example in that for some games that I
played there's a big speedrun scene and
I like to observe the meta of the
speedrunning and understand why they do
it but I don't really participate so
much and just be running itself what is
being an observer do um you removes a
lot of distress of the situation the
less you do like for me it allows me to
experience the joy of having solved it
quote-unquote or like solve the problem
understanding something learn something
new
that any risk yeah so interesting what
do you think about that it's a good
question I mean I don't like risk in
general I feel like it's kind of a
normal thing yeah for people but we're
asking you questions that are gonna have
very very plain and simple answers okay
so it doesn't have to be a complicated
answer yeah it's just kind of play
because the questions that you ask I
always know that you ask things that are
kind of out of the blue and unexpected
and I'm hit with them like I don't know
what I think good that's why you're here
you're not here to share with us the
answers that you already have Zak yeah
you're here to learn the things that you
don't know so what do you think about
being an observer you say and I think
it's it may mean it's may sound simple
but I think it's very good I'm glad that
you're laying down basic assumptions
because that's important I don't like
risk fair so what else I do like to work
through problems of things without ends
yeah yeah with that risk I so like yeah
I like to go like to work the problems
of things but if I can minimize or
remove risk then I like to do so mm-hmm
if it's something that requires a lot of
effort I like to give it a shot and put
in that effort but I don't want to have
that ever be wasted okay so having it be
on something that's almost hobby like
innocence means that even if I don't
figure out either someone else well and
then I can look at their answer or it's
like yeah whatever I'll just go do this
with something else mm-hmm and it
doesn't feel like I wasted any time
again low risk are you an observer for
your life
sometimes okay there are times that I
have that perspective where I observed
my own life but and what happens to you
in those times I sort of just become
detached for a lot of the emotional
aspects of it do you still feel the
emotions yeah I still feel them but not
quite to the same degree I don't know
how to explain it sure we don't have
good words for that in English by the
way yeah so what do you think I mean is
it a pleasant or unpleasant experience
to be an observer in one's life kind is
neutral okay what is it like to not be
an observer in one's life life is kind
of
feels pretty bad yeah what about when
things are good I mean it feels good in
the good situations does it feel better
to be an observer or better to feel good
in the good situations this means
specifically in the good situation it
feels good to be in them and not
observing them hmm
I think that's an experiment that you
should run I'd love to hear your answer
after you actually use your scientific
training to develop a hypothesis and
systematically collect data so what
we're talking about is exactly what
would that talked about so when you said
when I kind of asked what is it like to
not be an observant you were like well
most of life is so would this said
that we're all human being this is the
fundamental state of life is dukkha or
suffering and that the way to get free
of dukkha and suffering is to become an
observer then consciousness and mind are
separate things and that even as you
that emotion exists within the mind but
consciousness is separate of the mind
and that's hard for us to really
understand but it's kind of like what
you said it's hard to describe you still
feel the emotions
it's just there's distance between you
and the emotions it's like the
difference between being in a cage with
a lion or maybe I've just been watching
too much Tiger King or or being outside
of the cage right the lion is still
there and it hasn't changed but your
position with respect to the lion
drastically changes what you're able to
appreciate or not appreciate about the
lion does that make sense mm-hmm and and
so I how much of an observer have you
been throughout this whole saga with
with grad school I didn't really start
doing so until at some point in the
therapy that was one of those things
that they talked about was trying to not
be in the storm but be aware of the
storm being there you can't make it go
away but look at it don't be in it in a
sense yeah which I could only pull off a
handful of times at best because it's so
hard to do absolutely right so this is
why we train like we don't start
we don't dump people into the ocean to
teach them how to swim right we start in
calm waters and that's why I like
meditation is normally done like we
start by observing our breath and we
separate our mind from we sort of
develop a sense of consciousness outside
of mind but something like breath that
has like nothing no value attached to it
and the more valuable things become the
harder it is to be detached mm-hmm and
in your case it's it's hard right this
is what I think is really unfortunate
you know we teach this stuff as
treatment and therapists do it instead
of teaching it as a basic skill that
everyone learns in school which is
really where I think it should be taught
like it's kind of like okay like a
therapist is sort of like someone who
teaches you how to swim but people don't
seek out therapists until they're
drowning in the ocean it's like kind of
really bass-ackwards yeah and and so
that's part of you mean that's part of
why we do this right so I'm part of our
goal here is to help people understand
some of these skills and start to
develop them and and hopefully be
prepared for when when stuff like what
happens to you happen but let's kind of
go back
to your story so what happened the next
day uh I think X the next day I went to
therapy and I told her all about it and
then she was like you should go home
today or well it was it was more like if
like I think that you should you should
decide for yourself but if you think
that you shouldn't you should go home to
it so that was on like a Friday or
something and so I took that day off I
just emailed my PA I was like I can't do
today above the blah I didn't even like
really read much whatever I would just
sense it and then that day and that
entire weekend I spent playing path of
Exile non-stop for like 18 hours a day
just trying to not experience anything
mathematics I was very good at that yes
then I had to go back to work on Monday
I don't remember a whole lot at some
point in there I I just I don't wanna
say like forcefully but like convinced
my PI like I can't write this paper it's
not going to happen and also it was like
I'm in a pretty place right now I'm
thinking about either taking leave of
absence or dropping down to the master's
program or something like that I've been
talking with the therapist about this he
was kind of hesitant eventually at some
point I had to as I brought up with her
she was like dude I'm gonna write you a
letter to your PI so he understands how
serious the situation is cuz he's not
taking it seriously eventually decided
we decided to drop downs the master's
program instead of the PhD cuz I was
almost done with my credits and I was
like cool finished my credits and now
just graduate take my degree and go do
something else and then I found out that
I had to write a thesis still and they
were like yeah you got like since you
haven't gotten anywhere in your research
that's like at least another six months
before you down with that I can't take
this for six more months and then that's
when I attempted weep absence and okay
yeah
then moved out came back here and spent
three and a half months playing video
games and not talking about it how does
it feel to talk about it today it's nice
to address it it's like it's been there
and it's been kind of eating away very
slowly because I try not to focus on it
but it's been sitting there and yeah I
mean I've been watching a lot of streams
and trying to appear strains are trying
to like address it myself but there's
kind of only so far I can get stuck in
my own head mm-hmm
yeah it's it's nice to address it and
talk about it and get it out I guess do
you want to move forward
I guess define that a little bit better
cuz
I don't like I want to get out a feeling
all the time but I also just don't
really have any I don't like I don't
want to go back to what I was
experiencing before of this like super
high effort thing you're just so done
good good
I don't think I needed to find it I
think you understood the nuance of my
question and you gave me a very good
answer right so there's a presumption
that progress is completing your prior
goal mm-hmm
but it sounds like you don't want to you
want to do more than what you're doing
right now but you don't necessarily want
to quote-unquote succeed
yeah she's interesting right because
that's not usually how we think you
think that if I fail a test what's my
goal Cass the next ones yeah there's a
presumption that you keep going mm-hmm
right but it's good I'm glad I think
it's actually a huge step forward that
you realize that you may not want to do
that so now we're gonna get so how do
you think we can help you Zach what
would be helpful
um I guess how to like solve these sort
of emotional attachments I still have
that because like you say I there's this
feeling that I have to live up to
certain expectations even still even
though like I failed and there is I
would hope eventually a release from
that I still feel attached to those
expectations
sure awesome it's the burden of
potential okay yep absolutely so I think
some of this is going to be propagated
by you and some of it as an echo so
you've got a choice you just what was
your reaction they're like what we echo
confusion okay so so what I mean by that
is like like so the the burden of
potential is something that has been fed
you
been feeding it every day growing up
being the kid who's always been able to
get things done faster than everyone
else every time you have that thought
every time you make that observation you
feed the act of the the sort of beast of
potential now you failed I don't think
that you think very often that I've
always been able to do things faster
than everyone else right so you've
stopped feeding that echo you start
stopped feeding that beast of potential
but an echo remains it's not the
original sound it's just the like you
know it's the after-effects or the
shadow of that potential which is gonna
still be bouncing around in your head
for a while the main issue is whether
you continue to feed it or not if you
don't feed it it's gonna die down on its
own like you'll start to accept that
like you know you should I mean
hopefully what you'll do is start to
accept that like you shouldn't plan your
life based on what you think you should
do or what you're capable of but you'll
start to devote yourself towards like
doing things that you care about and not
really like worrying about whether you
do a good enough job you know I think if
you have a love for science you should
pursue science but you shouldn't get
bogged down and getting a PhD does that
mean you will get a PhD yeah sure why
not
but it doesn't mean that getting a PhD
is the goal like the PhD is just because
otherwise like it's gonna be hard to do
science if it's like kind of this
rigorous rat race kind of stuff you're
gonna like learn whatever skills you
want to or learn sign so then you can go
work in industry or you can be an
academic like whatever it doesn't matter
but like if your goal is a love for
science then that's what you should
pursue and don't worry about potential
now the interesting thing is that you're
also feeding another beast which is sort
of the the beast of like lack of
self-worth and this is the thing that
sort of says that because I fail I am a
bad person like there's a difference
between family like it this beast is the
one that confuses failing at a task with
being a failure so for you to be able to
take a step back and realize that like
once again if you didn't do well in a
ph.d program and you were
exactly what your P I told you to do
like how on earth is at your fault
mm-hmm sure if you're like a fifth year
grad student and you've got autonomy to
design your own experiments like if
you're working in experimental design
and then the the experiment doesn't work
that's different but it sounds like you
didn't do anything the experimental
design you were given you were like hey
monkey go ahead and perform this dance
for me and then do it again every day
for ten hours a day and you were dancing
the way they told you to and it didn't
work out so I don't really think that
that's your fault but you don't see that
right and this is where I think that
there's there's a lot here where like
you kept on using phrases like stressed
out and overwhelmed but that's not
really those are indicators of amplitude
they're not like indicators of like
direction or quality does that make
sense like overwhelmed is quantity it's
not quality so what is the quality of
what you are feeling are you dealing
with shame probably are you dealing with
fear are you dealing with anger right so
shame I'm sure we can all accept like
that we've seen pretty clearly that you
are a failure but are you afraid I mean
I was I was mostly angry that like my P
I wasn't taking anything that I was
saying seriously and I was like I wasn't
in control of the situation my input and
why I was taken there wasn't valued and
I was mad about that and I was mad that
things were going the way they were are
you still mad I wasn't able to do
anything yes how mad are you yeah
not like crazy super mad but like it's
like it frustrated like Oh stupid okay
good
no so now the question becomes how mad
are you
and how suppress as your anger question
I don't feel like it's that surprised I
don't know okay
okay well trusty right so it's good that
you you noticed the question it sounds
like you actually did some exploration
there's a good for you
are you afraid afraid of what you tell
me see everyone thinks that I make I
help people but I don't help people I
don't make your lives harm wants
to come on in be on stream I don't think
you guys realize how heavy this is
recession this is definitely different
than I was expecting different being in
the hot seat isn't it it's it's it's
really different even when you're from
the even you're sitting there you're
like oh how would I react if he asked me
these questions like you usually come up
with something then you sit and seat
you're like dude I got nothing like yeah
so are you afraid Zak I'm afraid that if
I try to branch out of my comfort zone I
can't roll it down if I if I try to like
I spent my whole life in science and
engineering and chemistry and like these
are the things that I've always been
good at I'm afraid that if I try to go
outside of that that it won't and well
I'm afraid that I mean again living up
to expectations I'm afraid that I'll I
won't meet anyone's expectations or what
I think will be good won't be good to
anyone else and that that will affect me
I'm afraid that I won't be able to break
out of the cycle that I'm in right now
yeah I'm afraid that whatever I end up
doing is gonna fail fairness right so
now let's just think about that for a
second so first of all as you say those
things do you feel fear yes are you an
observer
kind of right answer right so I think
you feel the fear but I think your
acknowledgment of them so when you're
feeling the fear fully and it takes over
your mind you can't articulate it does
that make sense mm-hmm your capacity to
articulate only comes with distance
right so I asked you a question are you
afraid and then you didn't know how to
answer it and then a few seconds later
then we talked for a moment about how
hard it is to answer questions and then
you went often you gave like half a
dozen specific fears that you have
that's progress that's what you're here
for right so now you know that these are
things that you carry with you right
these are the different debuffs and
you've got to think a little bit about
each of these D buffs and how you want a
gear in response to those Big D buffs so
it sounds like you fought and we haven't
really talked about this but I'm sure
other people have subconsciously pieced
this together that he's thought about a
career outside of science he's thought
about maybe doing something else right
and because he shared with us that he
has a fear that he's not going to be
successful elsewhere that's a specific
fear so that's kind of like okay and so
then like if you have a like if you have
a debuff that increases your your
vulnerability to fire you have to like
gear up with like fire resistance gear
right and so as you move in as you
explore other career options just be
aware that you're gonna feel less
confident than you do in science which
is gonna be bizarre in a second because
you don't feel confidence in science
anyway but that like that's an
additional fear that you have to account
for now that fear is not reality like in
general I think you're gonna be fine
outside of science I don't think people
have a talent for chemistry like I think
what you're good at is probably some
amount of hard work analytical
capability experimental design like all
that I mean you could be a
strategic consultant and all that stuff
is going to apply you could go into
finance if you cared about it and like
analyze financial models like in run
experiments I saw a really cool video
from three blue one
you guys should check it out about
simulating pandemics it's like a YouTube
channel that's very cool so he does like
statistical analyses and he just like
simulates like so he has one about
simulating pandemics and different kinds
of interventions and stuff like that I
think that the things that make you good
at science are gonna apply to a bunch of
fields you could even go into like
marketing and branding if you want to
and just be heavily metric and analytic
focus like that's fine I think what
makes you good at being you is like not
content specific so I'm good at being a
psychiatrist I'm also good at like
corporate consulting but my take on
corporate consulting is I tend to be
like an observer of human behavior an
observer of people and I try to teach
people about themselves so I'm a pretty
good teacher I'm a pretty good
psychiatrist I'm a pretty good
meditation teacher and I'm also pretty
good consultant but it's like it that's
because I don't define myself by a
particular profession I define myself by
like a particular kind of skill Sattar
interest and in your case I think you'll
do fine outside of science provided that
you get to do that which you really
enjoy which is like learning about
things and figuring things out right so
like in strategic consulting for example
you know there'll be a company that will
go to like McKinsey or Bane or whatever
and they'll say like hey we're thinking
about opening up a power plant in
Southeast Asia which country should we
open it in and so what they do is like
they just take a bunch of information
try to analyze it and then try to give
someone a recommendation we think you
should open it in Thailand here are
reasons a B C and D if you want to open
it in Cambodia here are the things that
are different and this is why we think
you should do Thailand it's done in
Cambodia
something tells me is act that you would
be good at a lot of different stuff
besides science and chemistry what do
you think I mean yeah I can agree I do
rent the situation of when I look at
various jobs and I you know maybe yet
maybe I can apply my skillset to this
then I don't meet the stupid
requirements and I can't apply anyways
but sure
right so I wouldn't let not meeting the
requirements prevent you from applying
so not to say that you should apply for
a bunch of jobs where you don't meet the
requirements but if there's something
you're genuinely interested I think you
should write a good cover letter and
send it off
I have master's like a master's in
chemistry is pretty respectable like no
matter where you end up I think you
should get your masters by the way cuz
that's just that'll be something but
anyway maybe not but the so the first
thing is to understand that you have
different fears and that as you think
about how to move forward just
acknowledge those fears because those
fears are part of what's keeping you at
home playing runescape does that make
sense what else is keeping you at home
hmm
virus sure I was saying that there's
probably another fear which is that
whatever I do it'll end up the same way
that was that was one of the things
that's really I was conflicted with when
I was thinking about what to do I'm did
you drop out or not cuz I was like I
mean I just had like a severe depressive
episode and I haven't fully recovered
with it and if I keep going I'm worried
that I'll just fall right back in again
are you still in mental health treatment
not right now no okay so I'd consider
getting back into mental health
treatment but I think that that too now
you have a some scar if you you're
familiar with some scars weird the word
a thousand times nice so that everybody
needs so so what it is is sort of like a
ball of undigested emotion that kind of
lingers with you and like colors your
vision about the future you can also
think about it like an unprocessed
trauma so this entire experience has
been traumatic for you and so as you
move forward as long as that trauma is
there like you know if you have if you
get married to someone and you have an
abusive husband or wife and they beat
you even after you like leave them
you're gonna have the fear that the next
is gonna turn out that way and even the
more sicker thing about the human mind
is you may select for those kinds of
people which which is sort of like
because sometimes our mind prefers and
this is sort of this goes back to our
conversation with your mom and your
parents where like it would sometimes
almost be easier if they just called you
a up to your face because at least
that makes sense to you if they have
faith and hope and who you are and your
possibility of success how does that
make you feel yeah it's like it's just
why yeah right so like like oddly enough
so like now this is that now we can
understand why of people who have been
abused seek out abusive partners because
when someone treats them genuinely
they're like what the this is a lie
and then someone treats them the letters
like no like ah this is a game I
know how to play and so bizarrely our
mind prefers that which we know to that
which is good for us and you've got to
be really really careful because you're
not a have you failed sure but
like you failed because of a combination
of circumstance and an experience it's
not you aren't a failure but have you
failed absolutely and that's okay and so
going forward you've got to be really
careful about that in this too I think
your your your answer is gonna be to
certain degree in observation right so
you have to notice that there's gonna be
a part of your mind that's gonna tell
you that I'm gonna fail at everything
I've done but like by the way did you
finish second grade second grade yeah
like like elementary school sex right
yes
there died succeeded at it I I got
through it what about third grade yes
fourth grade you know fifth grade where
you're saying like got through it and
succeeded right yeah
yes okay so you have succeeded at stuff
you graduated from high school yes you
graduated from college yep but I thought
you were gonna fail at everything you do
do you like okay yeah
what do you feel no tell me
well like its let me know if you need
help yeah
yeah I need help so those don't count
right yeah
is that what you're thinking like it
doesn't count yeah yeah it's it's it was
stuff that happened earlier it was
easier just it doesn't count it doesn't
count it doesn't count right is that how
you feel
yes yeah so let's just think about that
for a second your mind is coming up with
all kinds of reasons why it doesn't
count as second grade who fails
second grade sometimes people do it
doesn't count so just now see what kind
of look at what rigged ass game your
brain is playing with you it's funny cuz
you say that and like yeah my brains
rigged my princess ring you're talking
about like so tell me how is the game
ranked very good now you're growing what
am I saying
I'm saying the game's rigged I I'm
taking one single event and I fixating
on it ends yeah and what are you doing
to all of the other data points ignoring
them absolutely right I'm gonna run an
experiment Zack and I'm going to say
that feeding a plant with beer is better
than feeding it with water and I'm gonna
take a dozen plants and I'm gonna give
him 11 of them water and I'm gonna give
one up a beer
and after two months I have 11 healthy
plants and I have one kind of stunted
plant and what I'm essentially doing is
taking my 11 doh the healthy plants I'm
saying this I'm gonna dump him in
the trash and there's my beer plant see
I was right all along
it's the only one that's growing the
game is rigged because your
discarding data all the time this is
what how a cognitive bias works and this
all comes from your emotion because
that's like it's irrational so it's
coming from your emotion fine you can't
convince it otherwise and when I pointed
out to you rationally even your rational
mind is like yeah the game is rigged but
then the other part of you that's what
does that part saying that parts is like
of course it's not rigged this is like
everything else doesn't count this is
you know this is what happens this sucks
and this is the way it is yeah right so
just see that about yourself right and
let's like laugh at it that's kind of
up yeah yeah right but that's
that's how it is so when we have our
emotions aren't rational so we can't
expect them to be rational understand
that there's a part of yourself that is
hurt and there's a part of yourself that
has lost confidence now the real
challenge is is in your struggle with
that part I wouldn't say you should try
to fight it or overcome it
because that doesn't really work too
well what I'd say is you should take it
with you just take it with you right
like every everything that you do take
this failure with you and say there's a
decent chance like this part of me is
saying like there's a logical part of my
mind that says that actually I'm not
really a family or in this part of is
like no you you are a failure
nothing you could do is right and then
you're like okay treat it like a you
know like a eccentric uncle who comes to
all of your family gatherings and you
can't get rid of him like eleven people
are dressed normally and he's wearing
you know underwear over his pants
because he feels like he's a superhero
and like he's just gonna be who he's
gonna be like the part of you that feels
that you're a failure is gonna feel like
it's a failure and it's gonna take time
for you to comfort and reassure that
part and for him to kind of calm down
it's like a dog that has gotten like
riled up and is afraid that like
someone's in his intruder you just have
to smell you can't take the dog out the
dog is gonna be with you your failure is
gonna be with you so carry it with you
let it be with you and then also don't
let it control you
does that make sense yeah easier said
than done but absolutely so how do we
make it easier to do
what do you think yeah I got nothing so
dad I'm trying to come up with so I
think this is where as you deal with
each of the deep as we identify things
they become easier to deal with that's
number one so if you're saying I'm
stressed and I'm overwhelmed you can't
do anything with that people don't just
wake up one day and say I'm on
overwhelmed now done right so if we
think about like you know something like
therapy what happens is we help people
identify the reasons that they're
overwhelmed and then it's like we've
I've used this analogy before it's like
detection in a game right like you have
invisible things that are attacking you
and that's overwhelmed because remember
it's not like quality you don't know
what it is all you know is you're taking
a shitload of damage every round like I
can't see it I don't know I'm
overwhelmed but just the dps is through
the roof
and then once you identify it then you
can start to actually like do something
like oh there's like this like mob
that's here that's attacking me let me
like move over this way and then like
its effect on you lesson so
identification is the first thing
noticing is the second thing and this is
where we come back to the observer so
the more that you can act from the
observer the less powerful all of this
stuff becomes and so this is where if
you can develop a meditative practice go
for it I think you should consider
getting back into mental health
treatment if it's an option that'll help
you for it
then also give yourself some time I
think three three months of playing like
runescape is not that bad
I mean not to say that you know it's
good or that it's unacceptable I'm sure
there are people who have been playing
group scared for seven years and I'm an
accomplished anything and you know
comparison and stuff is bad but I'm just
saying like give yourself some time and
cut yourself some slack
it's April kovat is going on anyway like
you're not gonna finish your semester
I'd say take some time to take care of
yourself and work work on yourself like
your goal is to like repair damage
between now and the fall of next year if
you need to apply for something consider
applying for something but basically
take care of yourself get get rid of the
depression you know or handle that try
to grow the observer try to notice your
fears and then try to you know get get
yourself ready by like August if you
want to I mean I'm tempted that I'm
actually tempted to start writing
letters to people
is a psychiatrist to let them just play
video games for like a month
at home like just give them just like a
you know burn out Eve thoughts questions
[Music]
yes I mean I'm still feeling like I
don't want to go back it's fine
so I'm sort of in a state of like okay
what do I do about that I got you so you
don't do anything about that right now
okay right so you don't have to make
that decision today and you don't even
have to make it a month from now like
you make it and if it's too late and you
missed the deadline then you miss the
deadline whatever what I'm saying is
that like you're it's gonna be really
hard for you to make so like do you
acknowledge that your mind is irrational
right now so do you want to be making
decisions with this mind no there you go
that's why I'm saying like for a couple
months just focus on yourself and like
try to heal and try to get into a better
place and then though the answers about
what you do with your career and stuff
like that like this is the big problem
if you plan like they say like okay
should I go back to school should I
switch careers like to forget all of
that that's all that sheet isn't
unimportant actually right now the
important thing is that your instrument
is miscalibrated you're a scientist and
if you don't like tear your scale at the
beginning like how are all of your
experiments gonna be pretty exactly
it's the first thing that you should do
is just tear your scale right tear is ta
re by the way it's calibrate so you've
got a calibrate first and then we don't
think about it this way we don't give
ourselves time to heal we don't give
ourselves we just say like oh I'm a
failure like yeah so like deal with your
emotional you know
aftermath first and give yourself some
time to heal play some ruse or enscape
man go for it you know but like don't
just do runescape for 18 hours a day
like find a therapist spend some time
meditating you know it sounds like you
watch the marked streams and stuff so
continue doing that I'd consider reading
in your case meditations by Mark
sir alias have you ever rabbit do you
like to read yes so read meditations by
Marcus Aurelius right there it's like a
99 cent thing you can get on Amazon I
like to read hard copies of stuff it's
free because it was written like five
thousand years ago or something or like
a thousand or two thousand years ago so
it's in the public domain but you know
read a little bit and learn a little bit
and grow a little bit and give yourself
time to like heal from the damage and
understand that your instrument is not
calibrated or healthy right now so any
of the decisions this is where people
like this is the problem as they get
into this self-fulfilling prophecy if
you you try to move forward and you
it up because you're just not ready to
move you've got two broken legs and you
try to get up and you fall down again
and then it reinforces the idea that
you're a failure and then you try to get
up again and then you still fall down
because your legs are broken and then
you try again and you try again and the
more you try the more it becomes true
that you were a failure and then you
wind up stuck because at this point
instead of one incident you have a dozen
instruments in you have a dozen data
points and then your mind which believes
that wants to discard good data now now
it's it's one thing for you to be able
to see okay I have 12 years of successes
in one year of failure but once you have
12 years of successes in 12 years for
failure of failure that becomes a way
harder battle to win even rationally so
give yourself time to heal first because
otherwise you're gonna convince yourself
and you're gonna be true you're gonna be
right that you are a failure thoughts
questions before we wrap up that make
sense yeah that makes perfect sense I'm
sorry I couldn't transform your life but
that doesn't really happen yeah it makes
sense okay well good luck man yeah thank
you you have any assistly any clothes I
don't mean to end things abruptly but
that's sort of my schpeel no I mean we
touched on everything that I want to
touch on since yeah it was it's helpful
it's all let's meditate actually
oh yeah yeah so sorry go ahead it's the
things we do here isn't it
yeah it's it's good to talk about it
again and yeah last thing last concrete
thing that you should do is have a
conversation with your parents that's
gonna be emotionally hard right but you
need to ask them I would ask them
because I think the reason you don't
have the conversation is because you're
afraid of what they're gonna say there's
a part of you that knows that until you
talk to even though you believe that
they think you're a piece of
there's a part of you that's holding on
to hope that they're gonna say something
hopeful and there's a part of you that
it's I don't know how else to describe
this but it's so hard to hear their
positivity towards you right now that's
yeah that's almost exactly I was gonna
say is like there's the part that does
it wants to hear though yeah but you've
got to do that right so like it can be a
simple conversation I wouldn't have a
drink while you're doing it but you can
just say you know what do you guys what
do you guys think about this last year
I'd love to get your thoughts and then
you can share with them like this is how
the suit last year is gone for me and
then they're gonna always look forward
don't worry about looking forward or
have you found a job are you applying
for a job just to ask them like what
they think about your situation
you'll be surprised if you can get the
ball rolling it's gonna like the
conversations gonna go on its own
getting it started is really the hardest
part but and that too is like it's hard
to do so you just think about that a
little bit but I think right now you're
you're trying to make decisions and move
forward when you've got all this
like you're encumbered so you've got on
burden all that and then becomes way
easier you'll be back to where you are
as a key
okay okay your meditation let's think
have you seen triphasic breathing yeah
okay so let's do that
so I'm gonna teach you how to breathe so
I want you to sit up straight okay and
[Music]
okay so I want you to first observe the
breath in your chest and now I want you
to focus on your stomach
and as you breathe in I want you to push
your stomach out like expand your
stomach and suck the air down into your
abdomen and notice that as you breathe
out huh sorry I have a focus being
stupid in my head Oh be stupid in your
head go for him
let the focus go and then as you breathe
out notice that your stomach contracts
pulls in
so you can just focus on the sensation
of belly moving out and belly moving in
or you can visualize your belly button
or navel moving away from your spine
during inhalation and then pulling
towards your spine during exhalation
you can really push it all the way out
kind of drastically pull it all the way
and like suck in your spine to where you
can sort of where people would be able
to see your rib cages
and now what I want you to do is as you
belly breathe try to keep your chest
somewhat still so there may be an
inclination to expand everything when
you breathe it breathe in belly in chest
try to focus the expansion on your belly
during inhalation and exhalation let
your chest remain still
so this is the first phase of breathing
focusing on the abdomen
and now we're gonna add the second phase
as you breathe in and with a full belly
of air then I want you to forcibly
expand your chest or sort of
intentionally expand your chest
afterward and breathe in just a little
bit more so phase one is abdomen and
phase two breathe in with a full chest
of air and then out abdominal breathing
chest breathing and out
abdomen chest and out
and do one more breath
and now we'll add phase three so abdomen
chest and then raise your shoulders a
little bit spike up your shoulders raise
your clavicles and breathe just a little
bit more and then out it's not going to
be very much in that last phase just
five percent in with the belly in with
the chest and then up with the shoulders
and out
in with the belly expand the chest raise
the shoulders and out now do three
breaths just like that
let them flow together let your breath
be slow
if you begin to feel dizziness or
lightheaded let your breath pause after
the exhalation just sit and then as your
respiratory drive awakens breathe again
practice for about another minute
now go ahead and finish the breath that
you're on let your eyes remain closed
just feel the person that you are
you may have a feeling of failure you
may have fear anger shame you notice
that those are just pieces of you
either underneath that all or even
encompassing all those feelings is the
real you that all of the fluctuations of
the mind and the self happen within the
space of you
and now sort of feel the outline of your
physical form feel your head your
shoulders your arms almost like a
tracing
and notice that the fear and the shame
and the anger the failure they exist
somewhere within your belly somewhat
within your chest somewhere within your
throat possibly your head but they
mostly live in the torso or the abdomen
and now notice for a moment that that is
not the whole you that you have arms you
have shoulders you have feet you have
legs there's no fear or shame there
there's no anger or failure
but you were not those things
and sit with that sensation
in the world may victimize you may take
advantage of you circumstances could
change your job applications could be
rejected you may have a grade on your
transcript
but that none of those things can take
you away from this all those things may
be true but they are not this and that
this is your birthright to be in this
place and that this is who you are and
you carry this person with you all the
time
it's not about finding it's about
returning
now I'll let yourself come back
it's April 1st
world is falling apart and how do you
feel today Zach do anything that day
looks kind of chill good kind of chill
do you feel like playing runescape oh
yeah I noticed that too right notice
that desire that impulse
don't become attached to it quite yet
but notice it's there do not just the
negativity anyway any thoughts or
questions for you wrap up for the day
man
no awesome dude I feel better now listen
man good luck
I really wish you all the best take care
of man thank you
alrighty
oh there we go we forgot to ask him
about his um yeah go ahead play
runescape
we're gonna have to wrap up so we're at
our time for today I know people are
asking questions and stuff ah how do you
get rid of the potential version so
that's why I like that's a whole like
that's a whole hour about how to deal
with potential and how to understand so
how do you deal with major life setbacks
I think so let's let's answer that
question okay so how do you deal with
major life setbacks so you recognize
that it's a setback you recognize it's a
failure that's okay it's not the end of
the world that you survive failure and
you also notice the damage of the
failure so you've got to figure out like
where did you take damage and whether
they be emotions whether they be you
know the house of cards coming down
senses of failure being able to unable
to move forward you start by identifying
all of the ways in which you've taken
damage and then you recognize that like
all of those problems that you face or
all that damage that you've taken is
gonna make it so that your mind does not
function properly and so then you like
even if you try to move forward this is
the hard thing is that people who face
setbacks they try so hard to rebuild
their lives that like you guys know this
right you guys actually try really hard
you struggle very very hard to like not
plays runescape it's not that you're not
trying it's just that you're not
succeeding and you don't no one sees the
effort but you feel the effort like in
moments you feel the effort so intensely
so intensely and so the problem is not
one of lack of trying it's not that you
guys are actually lazy it's just that
you guys are using an instrument that
like is not functioning properly so the
way to deal with a setback is not like
positive thinking you can do it buddy
know it's to recognize okay what what
within me is broken
what within me is busted what have I
learned from this experience like am I
scared of ever trying so be it recognize
that see that be like okay how do I deal
with that like let me just see that
thing and let me carry it with me when
you go to the job applicant for a job
interview for example and you feel like
you're not gonna get it
you don't like suppress that part you
don't say
like Oh like there's no use in going
because if you suppress it that's what
happens it actually takes control it
takes control through suppression it
exerts its influence in the subconscious
and then prevents you from acting so you
got to bring it to the conscious notice
it and then like say you to it
right you say okay
fine you don't say you can say you say
okay you're a dog that has been really
really frustrated with my whole
situation fine you think we're gonna be
a failure maybe you're right maybe
you're wrong I'm gonna let you be where
you are and I'm gonna go ahead and go to
the job interview anyway and I'm gonna
do the best job that I can do it let it
be with you accept it and move forward
don't let it control you and you say
like oh just don't let it control me
like how do you not let it control you
you let it not control you by accepting
it because so far you haven't accepted
it and it controls you all the time
acceptance leads to freedom so
Alcoholics Anonymous is the most is the
best evidence-based treatment to get rid
of alcoholism there's a great
meta-analysis about this recently I
think from the Cochrane Collaboration
in the first law I mean I don't agree
with everything around Alcoholics
Anonymous I think I don't really I do a
different kind of thing and I tend to be
pretty effective but their first thing
is that they acknowledge that they're
powerless in the face of alcohol it's
like how on earth does that work like
even if you don't agree with Alcoholics
Anonymous or you think there are
different ways to do it
their first step is to acknowledge that
they're powerless in this in the face of
this so they cede control and thereby
get success she's really weird but
there's like actually scientific data
that suggests that that psychological
principle which by the way is what would
though has been teaching or taught a
couple thousand years ago but this
started teaching it a couple thousand
years ago even before but the so like
what those teachers were essentially
Yogi's right so if you call that
Hinduism or not that's up to you I think
Hinduism is sort of a Western construct
but people have been saying that like in
India and China for thousands of years
and along comes
and even Christianity says that an a a
sort of encapsulate that concept and
then people take like this
neurobiological addiction to alcohol and
there's somehow a are able to overcome
it through that concept so acceptance of
the thing actually leads to liberation
outcome absolutely